README.md, before:

# Pure SIMD 

A simple, extensible, portable, efficient and header-only SIMD library!

[TOC]

## Introduction

There are already tons of SIMD libraries, which usually export user-friendly interfaces by wrapping
the underlying messy SIMD intrinsics. 

Pure SIMD also provides user-friendly interfaces, but by a different means. It just unrolls loops introduced by various vector operations at compile time and leaves the rest work to compilers. Modern compilers can generate SIMD instructions from them easily, then the vectorization is done. 

This simple idea brings the following **advantages** to Pure SIMD:

* **Simplicity**. The implementation uses variadic templates to unroll loops introduced by various vector operations and to construct user-friendly interfaces. Neither intrinsics nor extra library dependencies are required. If you known variadic templates, you can write your own version very quickly.

* **Extensibility**. You can use the basic constructs to easily implement various vector operations. Nothing will limits your hands.

* **Portability**. All codes are written in standard c++14 and there are no extra dependences and no intrinsics. Some hight-level vector operations might have no corresponding low-level instructions on your machine, but that doesn't matter. Your program will run normally and even performs better than scalar ones due to the benefits of loop unrolling.

* **Efficiency**. The Pure SIMD depends on compilers to generate SIMD instructions from unrolled loops. For compilers supporting SLP(superword level parallelism) vectorization, such as gcc and clang, it's not a problem. As long as your compiler is OK, you can get nearly the same assembly code as manually-vectorized ones. Furthermore, intrinsics might get in the way of compiler's optimizations, while Pure SIMD has no such problems. Thus the latter may lead to better performance.

* **Header-only**.  

## Compiler Requirements

Supports c++14 & SLP vectorization.

## Interface

All types and functions are defined in the namespace pure_simd;

### Types

The vector type is defined as 
```c++
template <typename... Ts>
using vector = std::tuple<Ts...>;
```
Yeah, it's just a tuple. So you can use all utilities for tuple in c++ standard library.

Usually, all elements in a vector are of a same type. So there is an alias template for convenience:
```c++
template <typename T, std::size_t N>
using vector_n = vector<T, T ...>;
```
So vector_n<float, 4> is the same as vector<float, float, float, float>.

You can use different types, but some operations might not work.

### Basic Constructs

The `unroll` function unrolls unary/binary operations on vectors. The result's type depends on the operation.

You can use it to implement other operators.
```c++
template <typename Func, typename... Args>
inline auto unroll(Func func, vector<Args...> x, vector<Args...> y);

template <typename Func, typename... Args>
inline auto unroll(Func func, vector<Args...> x);

```

### High-level Operators:

Currently Pure SIMD supports +, -, *, /, max, min, and cast operators;

#### Load/Store operators:

The `store` operator stores a vector's elements to continuous locations.
The `scalar` operator constructs a vector from a scalar value;
The `ascend_from` operator constructs a vector of ascending sequence.

```c++
template <typename... Args>
inline void store(vector<Args...> x, detail::first_type_t<Args...>* array);

template <typename V>
inline auto scalar(std::tuple_element_t<0, V> x)

template <typename V>
inline auto ascend_from(std::tuple_element_t<0, V> x, std::tuple_element_t<0, V> delta)
```

Apparently,  the supported operators and documents are not enough, but creating new ones is easy.

## Example

The following code comes from [Practical SIMD Programming](http://www.cs.uu.nl/docs/vakken/magr/2017-2018/files/SIMD%20Tutorial.pdf) with some modification for simplicity. It's quite well-optimized and very compute-intensive.

```c++
void automatic_tick(float scale, float* screen)
{
    for (int y = 0; y < SCRHEIGHT; y++) {
        float yoffs = 0.0f;
        float xoffs = 0.0f;
        float dx = scale / SCRWIDTH;

        for (int x = 0; x < SCRWIDTH; x++, xoffs += dx) {
            float ox = 0.0f;
            float oy = 0.0f;

            // The following loop domintes the function's performance.
            for (int i = 0; i < 99; i++) {
                float oy_x_oy = oy * oy;
                float ox_x_ox = ox * ox;
                float ox_x_oy = ox * oy;
                float oy_x_ox = oy * ox;

                oy = -(oy_x_oy - ox_x_ox - 0.55f + xoffs);
                ox = -(ox_x_oy + oy_x_ox - 0.55f + yoffs);
            }

            float r = std::min(255.0f, std::max(0.0f, ox * 255.0f));
            float g = std::min(255.0f, std::max(0.0f, oy * 255.0f));

            screen[x + y * SCRHEIGHT] = r + g;
        }
    }
}
```

Here is another version which manually vectorized using intrinsics. 

```c++
void intrinsic_tick(float scale, float* screen)
{
    for (int y = 0; y < SCRHEIGHT; y++) {
        float yoffs = 0.0;
        float xoffs = 0.0;
        float dx = scale / SCRWIDTH;

        for (int x = 0; x < SCRWIDTH; x += 4, xoffs += dx * 4) {
            __m128 ox4;
            __m128 oy4;

            ox4 = oy4 = _mm_setzero_ps();

            __m128 xoffs4 = _mm_setr_ps(
                xoffs,
                xoffs + dx,
                xoffs + dx * 2,
                xoffs + dx * 3 //
            );

            __m128 yoffs4 = _mm_set_ps1(yoffs);

            for (int i = 0; i < 99; i++) {
                __m128 px4 = ox4, py4 = oy4;

                oy4 = _mm_sub_ps(
                    _mm_setzero_ps(),
                    _mm_add_ps(_mm_sub_ps(
                                   _mm_sub_ps(
                                       _mm_mul_ps(py4, py4),
                                       _mm_mul_ps(px4, px4)),
                                   _mm_set_ps1(0.55f)),
                        xoffs4));

                ox4 = _mm_sub_ps(_mm_setzero_ps(),
                    _mm_add_ps(_mm_sub_ps(
                                   _mm_add_ps(_mm_mul_ps(px4, py4),
                                       _mm_mul_ps(py4, px4)),
                                   _mm_set_ps1(0.55f)),
                        yoffs4));
            }

            for (int lane = 0; lane < 4; lane++) {
                float r = std::min(255.0, std::max(0.0, ox4[lane] * 255.0));
                float g = std::min(255.0, std::max(0.0, oy4[lane] * 255.0));

                screen[x + lane + y * SCRWIDTH] = r + g;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The following code is the version rewritten with Pure SIMD. It's nearly identical to 
the original one, except for some type specifications.

```c++
void pure_simd_tick(float scale, float* screen)
{
  using namespace pure_simd;

    // Select the vector size. 
  constexpr std::size_t vector_size = 4;
  using fvec = pure_simd::vector_n<float, vector_size>;

    for (int y = 0; y < SCRHEIGHT; y++) {
        float yoffs = 0.0;
        float xoffs = 0.0;
        float dx = scale / SCRWIDTH;

        for (int x = 0; x < SCRWIDTH; x += vector_size, xoffs += vector_size * dx) {
            fvec ox = scalar<fvec>(0.0);
            fvec oy = scalar<fvec>(0.0);

            for (int i = 0; i < 99; i++) {
                fvec oy_x_oy = oy * oy;
                fvec ox_x_ox = ox * ox;
                fvec ox_x_oy = ox * oy;
                fvec oy_x_ox = oy * ox;

                fvec xoffs4 = ascend_from<fvec>(xoffs, dx);
                fvec yoffs4 = scalar<fvec>(yoffs);

                fvec dot_55 = scalar<fvec>(0.55);

                oy = -(oy_x_oy - ox_x_ox - dot_55 + xoffs4);
                ox = -(ox_x_oy + oy_x_ox - dot_55 + yoffs4);
            }

            fvec r = pure_simd::min(
                scalar<fvec>(255.0),
                pure_simd::max(scalar<fvec>(0.0), ox * scalar<fvec>(255.0)));

            fvec g = pure_simd::min(
                scalar<fvec>(255.0),
                pure_simd::max(scalar<fvec>(0.0), oy * scalar<fvec>(255.0)));

            store(r + g, screen + x + y * SCRWIDTH);
        }
    }
}
```

Here is the driver code, which runs a simple benchmark.

```c++
void drive(const char* name, Ticker ticker, unsigned itimes)
{
    using namespace chrono;

    vector<float> screen(SCRWIDTH * SCRHEIGHT, 0.0);

    float scale = 0.0;

    for (unsigned i = 0; i < itimes; ++i) {
        auto start = steady_clock::now();

        scale += i / 10.0;
        ticker(scale, screen.data());

        auto done = steady_clock::now();
        unsigned millis = duration_cast<milliseconds>(done - start).count();
        cout << name << " cost " << millis << "ms" << endl;
    }

    cout << name << " sum = " << accumulate(screen.begin(), screen.end(), 0.0) << endl << endl;
}

int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
    if (argc != 2) {
        cerr << "Usage: " << argv[0] << " <iteration-times>" << endl;
        exit(-1);
    }

    unsigned itimes = atoi(argv[1]);

    drive("automatic", &automatic_tick, itimes);

    drive("pure_simd", &pure_simd_tick, itimes);

    drive("intrinsic", &intrinsic_tick, itimes);
}

```

After compiling the code using clang++ 9.0 with -O3 and -march=native on Ubuntu 18.04 with Intel Core i7-9750H CPU and running it with itimes = 10, the program gave the following outputs: 

```
automatic cost 142ms
automatic cost 109ms
automatic cost 109ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 112ms
automatic cost 111ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic sum = 8.91347e+06

pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 26ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 26ms
pure_simd cost 26ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd sum = 8.91347e+06

intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 38ms
intrinsic cost 35ms
intrinsic cost 35ms
intrinsic cost 35ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic sum = 8.91347e+06
```

You can see that the vectorized code using either Pure SIMD or intrinsics ran almost as four times faster as the scalar one. And the one using Pure SIMD is also faster than the one using intrinsics. It's maybe unfair but
I want to tell you that if we change the vector size from 4 to 32, the former will run as nine times faster as the latter. Thanks to the convenient interfaces, changing the size is quiet easy. 

Also, the vector size is not limited by the underlying machine, so you can enlarge it as much as you want. A major benefit of doing so is that you can exploit the power of different machines without change the code. The compiler will choose the best low-level vector size.

Commit message:

Fix the table of README

README.md, after:

# Pure SIMD 

A simple, extensible, portable, efficient and header-only SIMD library!

- [Pure SIMD](#pure-simd)
  * [Introduction](#introduction)
  * [Compiler Requirements](#compiler-requirements)
  * [Interface](#interface)
    + [Types](#types)
    + [Basic Constructs](#basic-constructs)
    + [High-level Operators:](#high-level-operators-)
      - [Load/Store operators:](#load-store-operators-)
  * [Example](#example)

<small><i><a href='http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc/'>Table of contents generated with markdown-toc</a></i></small>

## Introduction

There are already tons of SIMD libraries, which usually export user-friendly interfaces by wrapping
the underlying messy SIMD intrinsics. 

Pure SIMD also provides user-friendly interfaces, but by a different means. It just unrolls loops introduced by various vector operations at compile time and leaves the rest work to compilers. Modern compilers can generate SIMD instructions from them easily, then the vectorization is done. 

This simple idea brings the following **advantages** to Pure SIMD:

* **Simplicity**. The implementation uses variadic templates to unroll loops introduced by various vector operations and to construct user-friendly interfaces. Neither intrinsics nor extra library dependencies are required. If you known variadic templates, you can write your own version very quickly.

* **Extensibility**. You can use the basic constructs to easily implement various vector operations. Nothing will limits your hands.

* **Portability**. All codes are written in standard c++14 and there are no extra dependences and no intrinsics. Some hight-level vector operations might have no corresponding low-level instructions on your machine, but that doesn't matter. Your program will run normally and even performs better than scalar ones due to the benefits of loop unrolling.

* **Efficiency**. The Pure SIMD depends on compilers to generate SIMD instructions from unrolled loops. For compilers supporting SLP(superword level parallelism) vectorization, such as gcc and clang, it's not a problem. As long as your compiler is OK, you can get nearly the same assembly code as manually-vectorized ones. Furthermore, intrinsics might get in the way of compiler's optimizations, while Pure SIMD has no such problems. Thus the latter may lead to better performance.

* **Header-only**.  

## Compiler Requirements

Supports c++14 & SLP vectorization.

## Interface

All types and functions are defined in the namespace pure_simd;

### Types

The vector type is defined as 
```c++
template <typename... Ts>
using vector = std::tuple<Ts...>;
```
Yeah, it's just a tuple. So you can use all utilities for tuple in c++ standard library.

Usually, all elements in a vector are of a same type. So there is an alias template for convenience:
```c++
template <typename T, std::size_t N>
using vector_n = vector<T, T ...>;
```
So vector_n<float, 4> is the same as vector<float, float, float, float>.

You can use different types, but some operations might not work.

### Basic Constructs

The `unroll` function unrolls unary/binary operations on vectors. The result's type depends on the operation.

You can use it to implement other operators.
```c++
template <typename Func, typename... Args>
inline auto unroll(Func func, vector<Args...> x, vector<Args...> y);

template <typename Func, typename... Args>
inline auto unroll(Func func, vector<Args...> x);

```

### High-level Operators:

Currently Pure SIMD supports +, -, *, /, max, min, and cast operators;

#### Load/Store operators:

The `store` operator stores a vector's elements to continuous locations.
The `scalar` operator constructs a vector from a scalar value;
The `ascend_from` operator constructs a vector of ascending sequence.

```c++
template <typename... Args>
inline void store(vector<Args...> x, detail::first_type_t<Args...>* array);

template <typename V>
inline auto scalar(std::tuple_element_t<0, V> x)

template <typename V>
inline auto ascend_from(std::tuple_element_t<0, V> x, std::tuple_element_t<0, V> delta)
```

Apparently,  the supported operators and documents are not enough, but creating new ones is easy.

## Example

The following code comes from [Practical SIMD Programming](http://www.cs.uu.nl/docs/vakken/magr/2017-2018/files/SIMD%20Tutorial.pdf) with some modification for simplicity. It's quite well-optimized and very compute-intensive.

```c++
void automatic_tick(float scale, float* screen)
{
    for (int y = 0; y < SCRHEIGHT; y++) {
        float yoffs = 0.0f;
        float xoffs = 0.0f;
        float dx = scale / SCRWIDTH;

        for (int x = 0; x < SCRWIDTH; x++, xoffs += dx) {
            float ox = 0.0f;
            float oy = 0.0f;

            // The following loop domintes the function's performance.
            for (int i = 0; i < 99; i++) {
                float oy_x_oy = oy * oy;
                float ox_x_ox = ox * ox;
                float ox_x_oy = ox * oy;
                float oy_x_ox = oy * ox;

                oy = -(oy_x_oy - ox_x_ox - 0.55f + xoffs);
                ox = -(ox_x_oy + oy_x_ox - 0.55f + yoffs);
            }

            float r = std::min(255.0f, std::max(0.0f, ox * 255.0f));
            float g = std::min(255.0f, std::max(0.0f, oy * 255.0f));

            screen[x + y * SCRHEIGHT] = r + g;
        }
    }
}
```

Here is another version which manually vectorized using intrinsics. 

```c++
void intrinsic_tick(float scale, float* screen)
{
    for (int y = 0; y < SCRHEIGHT; y++) {
        float yoffs = 0.0;
        float xoffs = 0.0;
        float dx = scale / SCRWIDTH;

        for (int x = 0; x < SCRWIDTH; x += 4, xoffs += dx * 4) {
            __m128 ox4;
            __m128 oy4;

            ox4 = oy4 = _mm_setzero_ps();

            __m128 xoffs4 = _mm_setr_ps(
                xoffs,
                xoffs + dx,
                xoffs + dx * 2,
                xoffs + dx * 3 //
            );

            __m128 yoffs4 = _mm_set_ps1(yoffs);

            for (int i = 0; i < 99; i++) {
                __m128 px4 = ox4, py4 = oy4;

                oy4 = _mm_sub_ps(
                    _mm_setzero_ps(),
                    _mm_add_ps(_mm_sub_ps(
                                   _mm_sub_ps(
                                       _mm_mul_ps(py4, py4),
                                       _mm_mul_ps(px4, px4)),
                                   _mm_set_ps1(0.55f)),
                        xoffs4));

                ox4 = _mm_sub_ps(_mm_setzero_ps(),
                    _mm_add_ps(_mm_sub_ps(
                                   _mm_add_ps(_mm_mul_ps(px4, py4),
                                       _mm_mul_ps(py4, px4)),
                                   _mm_set_ps1(0.55f)),
                        yoffs4));
            }

            for (int lane = 0; lane < 4; lane++) {
                float r = std::min(255.0, std::max(0.0, ox4[lane] * 255.0));
                float g = std::min(255.0, std::max(0.0, oy4[lane] * 255.0));

                screen[x + lane + y * SCRWIDTH] = r + g;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The following code is the version rewritten with Pure SIMD. It's nearly identical to 
the original one, except for some type specifications.

```c++
void pure_simd_tick(float scale, float* screen)
{
  using namespace pure_simd;

    // Select the vector size. 
  constexpr std::size_t vector_size = 4;
  using fvec = pure_simd::vector_n<float, vector_size>;

    for (int y = 0; y < SCRHEIGHT; y++) {
        float yoffs = 0.0;
        float xoffs = 0.0;
        float dx = scale / SCRWIDTH;

        for (int x = 0; x < SCRWIDTH; x += vector_size, xoffs += vector_size * dx) {
            fvec ox = scalar<fvec>(0.0);
            fvec oy = scalar<fvec>(0.0);

            for (int i = 0; i < 99; i++) {
                fvec oy_x_oy = oy * oy;
                fvec ox_x_ox = ox * ox;
                fvec ox_x_oy = ox * oy;
                fvec oy_x_ox = oy * ox;

                fvec xoffs4 = ascend_from<fvec>(xoffs, dx);
                fvec yoffs4 = scalar<fvec>(yoffs);

                fvec dot_55 = scalar<fvec>(0.55);

                oy = -(oy_x_oy - ox_x_ox - dot_55 + xoffs4);
                ox = -(ox_x_oy + oy_x_ox - dot_55 + yoffs4);
            }

            fvec r = pure_simd::min(
                scalar<fvec>(255.0),
                pure_simd::max(scalar<fvec>(0.0), ox * scalar<fvec>(255.0)));

            fvec g = pure_simd::min(
                scalar<fvec>(255.0),
                pure_simd::max(scalar<fvec>(0.0), oy * scalar<fvec>(255.0)));

            store(r + g, screen + x + y * SCRWIDTH);
        }
    }
}
```

Here is the driver code, which runs a simple benchmark.

```c++
void drive(const char* name, Ticker ticker, unsigned itimes)
{
    using namespace chrono;

    vector<float> screen(SCRWIDTH * SCRHEIGHT, 0.0);

    float scale = 0.0;

    for (unsigned i = 0; i < itimes; ++i) {
        auto start = steady_clock::now();

        scale += i / 10.0;
        ticker(scale, screen.data());

        auto done = steady_clock::now();
        unsigned millis = duration_cast<milliseconds>(done - start).count();
        cout << name << " cost " << millis << "ms" << endl;
    }

    cout << name << " sum = " << accumulate(screen.begin(), screen.end(), 0.0) << endl << endl;
}

int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
    if (argc != 2) {
        cerr << "Usage: " << argv[0] << " <iteration-times>" << endl;
        exit(-1);
    }

    unsigned itimes = atoi(argv[1]);

    drive("automatic", &automatic_tick, itimes);

    drive("pure_simd", &pure_simd_tick, itimes);

    drive("intrinsic", &intrinsic_tick, itimes);
}

```

After compiling the code using clang++ 9.0 with -O3 and -march=native on Ubuntu 18.04 with Intel Core i7-9750H CPU and running it with itimes = 10, the program gave the following outputs: 

```
automatic cost 142ms
automatic cost 109ms
automatic cost 109ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 112ms
automatic cost 111ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic cost 108ms
automatic sum = 8.91347e+06

pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 26ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 26ms
pure_simd cost 26ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd cost 25ms
pure_simd sum = 8.91347e+06

intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic cost 38ms
intrinsic cost 35ms
intrinsic cost 35ms
intrinsic cost 35ms
intrinsic cost 34ms
intrinsic sum = 8.91347e+06
```

You can see that the vectorized code using either Pure SIMD or intrinsics ran almost as four times faster as the scalar one. And the one using Pure SIMD is also faster than the one using intrinsics. It could be unfair but
I want to tell you that if we change the vector size from 4 to 32, the former will run as nine times faster as the latter. Thanks to the convenient interfaces, changing the size is quiet easy. 

Also, the vector size is not limited by the underlying machine, so you can enlarge it as much as you want. A major benefit of doing so is that you can exploit the power of different machines without change the code. The compiler will choose the best low-level vector size.
